MOTTO 

DETERMINATION FOR SUCCESS


VISION    

   
“ AN INSTITUTION OF EXCELLENCE IN EMPOWERING THE GIRL CHILD”



MISSION

“TO MOULD AN ALL ROUND 
STUDENT THROUGH 
VALUE ADDITION  IN THE 
PROVISION OF QUALITY AND 
RELEVANT  EDUCATION”


 



WIYETA GIRLS SEC SCHOOL

HISTORY OF THE SCHOOL

The term “ Wiyeta” is a Bukusu word meaning “ Self help”
- Wiyeta Girls secondary school is located at Kipsoen scheme 18km from Kitale town on Kitale - Kapenguria road, 4 Kms from Kipsaina centre.

It is in Trans-Nzoia County, the former R. Valley province, Trans-Nzoia East district, Sinyerere location. It is on a 11 acre land and 2 ½ acre farm. 
The school enjoys a, quiet, cool environment at the foot of Cherangany hills. It borders Saiwa swamp to the West and Kabolet forest to the East.

Primary schools that neighbour wiyeta girls are more than enough to feed the schools annual intake even after selecting the best. They are Wiyeta, Saiwa, Kipsaina, Sitatunga, Tumaini and many more private schools.

It was started in 1982 as Kipsoen sec school in the Kipsoen scheme in the home of a settler Mr Toftee (currently the Wiyeta dispensary) with an enrolment of 70 students headed by Mr. Kibisu as community school (harambee).

It collapsed in 1984 because of the arrest of the school’s founders namely:- Mr Walter Odera, Mr. Kibisu and Rev Muceru because of running a non- registered school.Rev Daniel Muceru was then the parish minister in the Reformed Church which was and still is the sponsor of both the primary and secondary school. His arrest was as a result of that.

It resumed in 1986 after registration under the headship of Mr Wamutondo the then Headteacher of Wiyeta primary school. 

Wiyeta sec school is a brain child of Wiyeta primary school which had been started towards the end of 1960’s by RCEA and the community. The school was transferred to its present parcel of land and the name changed from Kipsoen Seocondary School to Wiyeta mixed secondary school.

In 1987 TSC posted a headteacher Mr Mukassa to the school. The school established   the first Board of Governors in 1987 led by Mr Kanyanga who was succeeded by Mr Opimo upto 2007 with RCEA as the sponsor.

The school was under- enrolled hence it was proposed that the girls be provided with boarding facilities to cater for girls coming from far and this was done in 1992.The idea  of a boarding section for girls  came up with Mr Mukassa the principal and Rev David Muhia  who was during that time  in charge of RCEA schools as an education secretary. Rev Muhia travelled to Holland to solicit funds for the construction of a boarding unit, water tank and sanitary section. In 1992 the boarding section was ready for use.  The sponsor built the first dormitory in 1991. In 1996 the school was proposed to be a full girls boarding which was effected in 2002.

The school population started picking up in 1999 and was finally registered as a double stream girls boarding in 2003.  Mr Mukassa retired in August 2005 and was replaced by Mrs Roseline Illa. Mr Illa worked with the following persons as chair of the Board: Mr Opimo, Mr Mbako and Rev Muhia. She was transferred in mid 2013 and replaced by Mrs Rosebella Orwaru. Mrs Orwaru was replaced by Mrs Ingati in June 2017. It was during Mrs Illa’s term that the school’s infrastructure changed a great deal. The following are some of the major ones: 
1.	The principal’s standard of the art house was build. 
2.	The deputy principal’s house – a gift from the ministry of housing was build .
3.	A green house
4.	a fish pond 
5.	And a multipurpose hall was all started during her time. 
She brought the management of Saiwa Game Reserve close.

The school’s steady rise in enrolment is attributed to its excellence performance in girls football nationally and East and Central Africa academic performance and the boarding environment away from disruptions.

The school has an established functional board chaired by Rev Muhia  and an established PTA chaired by among others Justus T. Kamakia, Mr Owoko, and Mr Joseph Njuguna.

Currently the students population is 484 with a teaching staff of 17 TSC teachers, 7 BOG teachers and a support staff of 17 members. The school has 10 classrooms an administration block, two laboratories, 5 dormitories, a kitchen and four staff houses.
The school is supplied with electricity by KPLC and has a stand- by generator. The school receives its water supply form a nearby dam. Plans are on the way for water harvesting funded by PTA and supported by the Eden wildlife fund Trust.  It gets its health services from the nearby Wiyeta health centre.

The first KCSE candidate took their exams at St Christopher’s secondary school as a centre. The school became an examination centre in 1991 and since then the academic performance has been rising steadily especially in 2010.

It also competes favorably in most co-curricular activities. Wiyeta aspires to be a school of choice and excellence in moulding the girl child so that she becomes a successive and responsible role model in the society.


WIYETA GIRLS SEC SCHOOL

HISTORY OF THE SCHOOL

The term “ Wiyeta” is a Bukusu word meaning “ Self help”
- Wiyeta Girls secondary school is located at Kipsoen scheme 18km from Kitale town on Kitale - Kapenguria road, 4 Kms from Kipsaina centre.

It is in Trans-Nzoia County, the former R. Valley province, Trans-Nzoia East district, Sinyerere location. It is on a 11 acre land and 2 ½ acre farm. 
The school enjoys a, quiet, cool environment at the foot of Cherangany hills. It borders Saiwa swamp to the West and Kabolet forest to the East.

It was started in 1982 as Kipsoen sec school in the Kipsoen scheme in the home of a settler Mr Toftee (currently the Wiyeta dispensary) with an enrolment of 70 students headed by Mr. Kibisu as community school (harambee).

It collapsed in 1984 because of the arrest of the school’s founders namely:- Mr Walter Odera, Mr. Kibisu and Rev Muhia because of running a non- registered school.

It resumed in 1986 after registration under the headship of Mr Wamutondo the then Headteacher of Wiyeta primary school. The school was transferred to its present parcel of land and the name changed from Kipsoen Seocondary School to Wiyeta mixed secondary school.

In 1987 TSC posted a headteacher Mr Mukassa to the school. The school established   the first Board Of Governors in 1987 led by Mr Kanyanga who was succeeded by Mr Opimo upto 2007 with RCEA as the sponsor.

The school was under- enrolled hence it was proposed that the girls be provided with boarding facilities to cater for girls coming from far and this was done in 1993. The sponsor built the first dormitory. In 1996 the school was proposed to be a full girls boarding which was effected in 2002.

The school population started picking up in 1999 and was finally registered as a double stream girls boarding in 2003.  Mr Mukassa retired in August 2005 and was replaced by Mrs Roseline Illa.

The school’s steady rise in enrolment is attributed to its excellence performance in girls football nationally and East and Central Africa.

The school has an established functional board chaired by Mr Alfred Mbako and an established PTA chaired by Justus T. Kamakia.

Currently the students population is 340 with a teaching staff of 13 TSC teachers, 4 BOG teachers and a support staff of 15 members. The school has 8 classrooms an administration block, two laboratories, 3 dormitories, a kitchen and one staff house.
The school is supplied with electricity by KPLC and has a stand- by generator. The school receives its water supply form a nearby dam. It gets its health services from the nearby Wiyeta health centre.

The first KCSE candidate took their exams at St Christopher’s secondary school as a centre. The school became an examination centre in 1991 and since then the academic performance has been rising steadily.

It also competes favorably in most co-curricular activities. Wiyeta aspires to be a school of choice and excellence in moulding the girl child so that she becomes a successive and responsible role model in the society.


                                      GOD BLESS WIYETA



